Practical Example
Let’s take a look at a practical example
that ties together many of the commands
we've explored so far.
We have been given an Apache HTTP
server log
that contains evidence of an attack.
Our task is to use Bash commands
to inspect the file
and discover various pieces
of information,
such as who the attackers were and what
exactly happened on the server.
First, we’ll use the head and wc commands
to take a quick peek at the log file in
order to understand its structure.
The head command displays
the first 10 lines in a file
and the wc command, along with the -l option,
displays a total number of lines in a file
Notice that the log file is text-based
and contains different space-delimited
fields like IP address,
timestamp,
HTTP request, etc.
This is a perfectly “grep friendly” file
and will work well for all of the
tools we have covered so far.
We’ll begin by searching through the
HTTP requests made to the server
for all the IP addresses recorded
in this log file.
To do this, we’ll cat the log file
and pipe the output into the cut
and sort commands.
This might give us a clue about the number
of potential attackers we're dealing with.
Here we see that less than ten IP addresses
were recorded in the log file,
although this still doesn’t tell us
anything about the attackers.
Next, we’ll use uniq and sort to
show unique lines,
further refine our output,
and sort the data by the number of times
each IP address accessed the server.
The -c option of uniq
will prefix the output line with the
number of occurrences.
A few IP addresses stand out
but we’ll focus on the address that has
the highest access frequency first.
To filter out the suspicious IP address
and display and count the resources
that were being requested by that IP,
we can use the following sequence:
From this output,
it seems that the IP address was
accessing the admin directory exclusively.
Let’s inspect this further.
Apparently the suspicious IP has been
involved in an HTTP brute force
attempt against this web server.
We can verify this with grep's -v flag
to reverse the search
and only show lines that do not
contain the word admin.
As we can see,
our log files contain no such entry.
Furthermore, after about 1000 attempts,
it seems like the brute force
attempt succeeded,
as indicated by the “HTTP 200” message.
This is a good example
that ties together many of the
basic commands we have explored.